# Iteratively Defined Lengths of Inaccessibility (IDLI):

This README is intended to share code for analyses performed in the following manuscript:

Yang MG, Wang S, Richter HJ, Harris N, Maresca M, de Wit E, Willenbring H, Maher J, Canzio D, Goodarzi H#, and Ramani V#. "Programmed, patterned, and pervasive nucleosomal distortion on mammalian chromatin fibers". *Submitted* (2024)

*All scripts are provided as is, without any warranty and for use at your own risk. This is __not__ the release of a software package. We are only providing this information and code, in addition to a description of methods, for making it easier to reproduce our analyses. We are __not__ providing any support for these scripts.*

Summary:
--------------------

We present a genome-scale method to map the single-molecule co-occupancy of structurally distinct nucleosomes, subnucleosomes, and other protein-DNA interactions via long-read high-resolution adenine-methyltransferase footprinting. Iteratively Defined Lengths of Inaccessibility (IDLI) classifies nucleosomes on the basis of shared patterns of intranucleosomal accessibility, into: i.) minimally-accessible octasomes; ii.) octasomes with stereotyped DNA accessibility from superhelical locations (SHLs) 1 through 7; iii.) highly-accessible unwrapped nucleosomes; and iv.) subnucleosomal species such as hexasomes. Applying IDLI to datasets from murine embryonic stem cells (mESCs), we discover widespread nucleosomal distortion on individual mammalian chromatin fibers. We observe epigenomic-domain-specific patterns of distorted nucleosome co-occupancy and translational positioning, including at murine enhancers, promoters, and satellite repeat sequences. Nucleosome distortion is programmed by the presence of bound transcription factors (TFs) at cognate motifs; occupied TF binding sites are differentially decorated by distorted nucleosomes compared to unbound sites, and degradation experiments establish direct roles for TFs in structuring binding-site proximal nucleosomes. Extending IDLI to single-molecule footprinting data from primary murine hepatocytes, we observe evidence for pervasive nucleosomal distortion in vivo; we further confirm a role for the hepatocyte master regulator FOXA2 in subtly impacting nucleosome distortion at hepatocyte-specific regulatory elements in vivo. Our study provides much-needed insight into the interplay between nucleosome dynamics, DNA sequence, and regulatory factor binding across the mammalian epigenome. More generally, our work provides an essential framework to model transcription factor binding, nucleosome remodeling, and cell-type specific gene regulation across biological contexts.

Code overview:
--------------------
*Preprocessing PacBio data for single-molecule accessibility*

To preprocess sequencing data for downstream analyses, we utilized software from Pacific Biosciences and a custom script ([hmm_output_t_values.py](https://github.com/RamaniLab/Subnucleosome/blob/main/hmm_output_t_values.py)). These resulted in the following output per sample: (1) an alignment of CCS reads to the mouse reference genome (mm10); (2) an accessibility prediction per CCS molecule (Viterbi path of HMM component of model); and (3) a .csv of footprint locations (*i.e.* start / end positions) and footprint sizes on a per-molecule basis. Files for (2) and (3) were generated across a range of t values (*t*  = 1, 31, 51, 71, and 101 / 1,000) for each sequencing library.

*Quantification of extent of methyltransferase footprinting per sequencing library*

We utilized the ratio of mononucleosome-sized to dinucleosome-sized footprints (MDR) as a proxy for measuring the extent of EcoGII footprinting on a per-sample basis. ‘Poorly methylated’ samples exhibit a higher fraction of footprints longer than the expected length of DNA protected by a mononucleosome, which can be ascribed to the failure of EcoGII to efficiently methylate in linker DNA. We employed a custom script ([compute_mdr_per_sample.py](https://github.com/RamaniLab/Subnucleosome/blob/main/compute_mdr_per_sample.py)), which uses the *find_peaks* function (from *scipy*) and computes the ratio of maximum peak heights in footprint length histograms for mononucleosome- and dinucleosome-sized footprints per sequencing library.

*Visualization of single-molecule data across different t values at single genomic loci*

All datasets from E14 mESCs with high MDR (>10) were processed with a custom script ([generate_bam_for_igv.py](https://github.com/RamaniLab/Subnucleosome/blob/main/generate_bam_for_igv.py)) that encodes single-molecule accessibility patterns (for any given *t* value) within a .bam file with alignment information. SAMOSA data at the SOX2 locus (chr3: 34,756,929 – 34,759,161; including the SOX2 promoter, gene body, and downstream SOX2 Control Region (SCR)) were visualized with a custom version of IGV, as previously described (https://github.com/RamaniLab/SMRT-Tag/tree/main/igv-vis). Bulk ATAC-seq data from mESCs were obtained as processed .bw files (GSE98390) and visualized at identical coordinates in the UCSC Genome Browser.

*Clustering single-molecule accessibility patterns with respect to footprint midpoints*

To examine patterns of nucleosomal distortion, we clustered accessibility patterns across a range of t values with respect to footprint midpoints (i.e. predicted dyad positions). Footprints <200 nt in length (from *t* = 1 / 1,000) within +/- 500 bp of midpoints of epigenomic domains, repeat sequences, or TF-binding motifs were selected. Per-footprint accessibility data (for *t* = 31, 51, and 71 / 1,000) from a 140-bp window centered on each footprint midpoint (*i.e.* 420 bp in total per footprint) were used as input for Leiden clustering (*res* = 0.5, 0.6, 0,6, and 0.6 for domains / repeats, SOX2, CTCF, and FOXA2 motifs, respectively). Clusters were filtered such that the least abundant clusters that collectively summed up to <10% of each dataset were removed. Representative code for performing this analysis is provided ([process_footprints_nucleosomal_distortion.py](https://github.com/RamaniLab/Subnucleosome/blob/main/process_footprints_nucleosomal_distortion.py)).

*Clustering single-molecule accessibility patterns with respect to sequence features of interest*

To define translational settings, we clustered accessibility patterns across a range of t values with respect to midpoints of a given sequence feature of interest (e.g. repeat elements, TF-binding motifs). Footprints <200 nt in length (from *t* = 1 / 1,000) wherein the absolute distance between the footprint midpoint and sequence feature was than half the total length of the footprint in question were selected (e.g. within +/- 100 bp for a 200 nt footprint). Per-footprint accessibility data (for *t* = 31, 51, and 71 / 1,000) from a 140-bp window centered on each sequence feature (*i.e.* 420 bp in total per footprint) were used as input for Leiden clustering (*res* = 0.3, 0.8, 0.8, and 0.8 for repeats, SOX2, CTCF, and FOXA2 motifs, respectively). Clusters were filtered such that the least abundant clusters that collectively summed up to <10% of each dataset were removed. Representative code for performing this analysis is provided ([process_footprints_translational_positions.py](https://github.com/RamaniLab/Subnucleosome/blob/main/process_footprints_translational_positions.py)).

*Footprint size distributions, mean accessibility patterns, and ‘horizon plots’ for subfootprint organization per cluster*

To assign putative biological function to clusters of nucleosomal distortion patterns or translational positions, we visualized the following features. First, we plotted the distribution of footprint sizes on a per-cluster basis for data from the lowest *t* value examined (*t* = 1 / 1,000). Second, we plotted mean accessibility as a function of distance to respective footprint / sequence feature midpoints. These data were specifically selected from the highest *t* value used for Leiden clustering in the previous step (*t* = 71 / 1,000). Third, we generated ‘horizon plots’ (analogous to commonly used ‘V plots’ in MNase-seq data) by computing z-scores for enrichment of footprints of particular size (20 – 200 nt) at particular positions (+/- 100 bp from footprint / sequence feature midpoints) for each individual cluster. z-scores are summed per position across a range of t values (*t* = 31, 51, and 71 / 1,000). Color scale limits for the resultant heatmap are bounded by the 0th (lower) and 95th (upper) percentile z-scores for positions within +/- 70 bp of the footprint / sequence feature midpoint. Instances of clusters with entirely unmethylated nucleosomes were manually filtered out before downstream quantification. Representative code for performing this analysis is provided ([plot_footlen_meanacc_horizondata.py](https://github.com/RamaniLab/Subnucleosome/blob/main/plot_footlen_meanacc_horizondata.py)).

*Structural visualization of nucleosomal accessibility patterns*

For structural visualization of mean accessibility patterns for defined clusters, we utilized a custom script ([accessibility_to_pdb_structure.py](https://github.com/RamaniLab/Subnucleosome/blob/main/accessibility_to_pdb_structure.py)) to convert our mean single-molecule accessibility data per cluster of interest from the highest *t* value used for Leiden clustering (*t* = 71 / 1,000) into a format compatible with visualization via ChimeraX (v1.7.1; *attribute* = percentAcc, *match mode* = 1-to-1, and *recipient* = residues). Accessibility values from residues -76 to +74 were overlaid on PDB 7KBD structure.

*Identification of single-molecule co-occupancy patterns for different footprint groups*

Individual fibers with at least three Leiden-classified footprints of nucleosomal distortion patterns within +/- 500 bp of repeat elements / TF motifs of interest were selected. Fibers with footprints >200 nt and/or with footprints in the least abundant 10% of clusters were excluded from further analysis. Consecutive ‘triplet’ footprints were tabulated by computing midpoints and lengths for: (1) the most proximal footprint upstream of the repeat element / TF-binding motif, (2) the central-most footprint nearest the repeat element / TF-binding motif, and (3) the most proximal footprint downstream of the repeat element / TF-binding motif. Per-molecule accessibility data was computed for a 2-kb window centered on the repeat element / TF-binding motif of interest for visualization alongside footprint positions, accounting for read and sequence feature strand appropriately. Representative code for performing this analysis is provided ([process_triplet_footprints.py](https://github.com/RamaniLab/Subnucleosome/blob/main/process_triplet_footprints.py)).

Data availability:
--------------------
Newly-generated datasets for this study is available on NCBI / GEO at GSEXXXXXX. Previously-published datasets from our laboratory utilized in this study are available on NCBI / GEO at GSE197979 and GSE225314.

Contact information:
--------------------
Please contact Vijay Ramani (vijay.ramani@gladstone.ucsf.edu) or Marty Yang (marty.yang@gladstone.ucsf.edu) for any questions.
